---
layout:	post
title:	"Pointers in C++"
description: What is all this pointer business
date:	2022-11-21
featured_image: '/images/posts/pointer-lichenstein.jpeg'
tags: data-structures algorithms breadth-first-search art copenhagen contemporary
author: Kostya Farber
---

## What are they?
Pointers are an essential part of the `c/c++` language. They are a powerful, mysterious and arcane tool. Kind of. They are actually quite simple.

> A pointer is a variable the stores the address of  another variable.

That's it.

Say we have a variable `x` of type *int* with value `25` stored at memory location `1004`. Then a pointer to `x` would contain the value `1004`.

*Note that a pointer also has an address which again could have a pointer pointing to it*.

## Syntax
So how do we use pointers in **c++**. Well we declare them using the `*`. 

```c++
int *my_ptr = nullptr;
char *my_char_ptr = nullptr;
double *my_double_ptr = nullptr;
```

It's easier to read this from right to left as: *a pointer of type integer, called my_ptr*. 

> It is important to note that it is best practise to always intiliaze pointers. If we don't they can be pointing *anywhere* and if we were to use this pointer we could change something in a memory location that we don't want to

## Address
How do we even get the address of a variable, if say, we wanted to store that in a pointer? In `c++` we can use the `&`. This operator is known as the *address-of* operator.

```c++
int foo = 25 // (address 1004)
int *ptr = nullptr;

ptr = &foo; 

cout << ptr // --> 1004
```

## Dereferencing
The next logical thing to think about is whether we can access the *underlying value* the pointer is pointing to. Of course we can! We do this using the *dereference operator*. This can simply be read as ***the value pointed to by***.

Using the example from above:

```c++
int foo = 25; // (address 1004)
int *ptr = nullptr;

ptr = &foo; 

cout << *ptr // --> 25
```

*Note: do not get confused with using the `*` in different contexts. They do different things depending on where you use them. For example in declaring pointers vs dereferencing them.*

## Changing values using pointers
We can change the value the pointer is pointing too. This is quite simple.

```c++
double temp = 37.5;
double *temp_ptr = &temp;

cout << temp; // 37.5

*temp_ptr = 10.0;

cout << temp; // 10.0
```

Notice here that we first **dereference** the pointer, that is we say, grab the value pointed to by pointer and then assign `10.0` to that variable.

If we where to try do this *without* dereferencing, we would get an error as we would be attempting to assign a double to a pointer. This isn't allowed as pointers have to contain **addresses**.

## Pointers relationship to arrays
Pointers and arrays have an interesting relationship. Arrays in `c/c++` are **implemented as pointers to the first element in the array**.

So in other words if define an array and name it `my_array` this is actually just an alias for the memory location of the first element.

```c++
int my_nums[5] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}; 
cout << my_nums << endl; // 0x305384b20

cout << &my_nums[0] << endl;  // 0x305384b20
```

So if I print `my_nums`, I get back the memory location of the first element, which is at `0x305384b20` on my comupter. Indeed, if we print the reference to the first element to the array (the memory location) we get back the same value as when we just print the *name* of the array. So what happens when we declare a pointer to my array? That's a good question and the answer seems obvious now.

```c++
int *my_nums_ptr = {nullptr};
my_nums_ptr = my_nums;
cout << my_nums_ptr; // 0x305384b20 
```

This pointer is just the memory location of the first element, exactly the same thing as what `my_nums` is.

So what happens when we access elements at each index?

## Pointer Arithmetic
How do we access the next element in an array? We usually do this using subscript notation:

```c++
cout << my_nums[2] << endl; // 3
```

But what actually happens here? If we turn back to the fact that an array is just a **contigous collection of homogenous elements in memory**, then the next element should be the size of that data type plus the previous location in memory, right? You would be correct to think that.

For example, we know that an `int` takes up four bytes of memory. If we check the memory locations of the first two elements, we would expect to see something like this:

```c++
cout << "Memory location of the first element: " << &my_array[0] << endl;
cout << "Memory location of the second element: " << &my_array[1] << endl;

Memory location of the first element: 0x30df74b20
Memory location of the second element: 0x30df74b24
```

Indeed these two elements are four bytes away from each other! Awesome. Lets experiment with the pointer to `my_nums`.

What happens when we add, let's say the number one to the `my_nums_ptr`?

```c++
cout << "Increment pointer by 1: " << (my_array_ptr + 1) << endl; // 0x30df74b24
```

Oh okay! It looks like we get back the memory location of the next element back. It seems that adding one to the array actually adds **four bytes** to the memory location.

*This is pointer arithmetic*. When we add 1 to a pointer we move it by the size of the data type it is pointing to. Quite nifty right!

## Subscript notation and pointer arithmetic
Hmm. But I want the value at that next memory location. Wait. Isn't there that dereference operator, maybe I can use that?

```c++
cout << "Increment pointer by 1 and dereference it: " << *(my_array_ptr + 1) << endl; // 2
```

Okay cool! That makes sense. If we shift the pointer by the size of an `int` *then* dereference that we get back `2`. If we do `my_nums[1]` we get the same thing. So I guess we can say something like:

```c++
my_nums[1] = *(my_nums_ptr + 1);
```
